# Standard Operating Procedure - EPA 200.5

# 1. Application of Method

# 2. Applicable Matrices

# 3. Instrument Detection Limits

# 4. Scope and Application

## 4.1
For reference where this method is approved for use in compliance monitoring program (e.g., Safe Drinking Water Act [SDWA]) consult both the appropriate sections of the Code of Federal Regulation (40 CFR Part 141 § 141.23) and the latest Federal Register announcements.

## 4.2
This method provides a specific procedure utilizing axially-viewed plasma atomic emission signals generated only by pneumatic nebulization for the analysis of all analytes. Some AVICP-AES instruments are so configured that the emitted signal can also be viewed alternately or simultaneously in a radial manner. Radially-viewed signals for the determination of drinking water matrix elements (Ca, Mg and Na) and silica are acceptable. The Ca and Mg data can be used in the calculation of hardness.

## 4.3
When viewing sodium emission from the axial configuration, the ratio of signal intensity to analyte concentration is not a linear response. Therefore, sodium should be calibrated using multiple standard solutions of increasing concentration to properly define the response ratio at various levels of concentration (see Sect. 14.3).

## 4.4
For drinking water compliance monitoring, a “total” element determination (dissolved + suspended fractions) is required. When the measured turbidity on an acid preserved sample is < 1 NTU, direct analysis, without sample digestion, is permitted with the use of some approved spectro-chemical methods. However, when using this method, all samples are digested and pre-concentrated prior to analysis using the total recoverable digestion described in Section 12.16. Pre-concentrating the sample prior to analysis increases analytical sensitivity for meeting the method detection limit (MDL) requirements.Thus, when using this method, the need to measure sample turbidity prior to metal analysis is eliminated.

## 4.5
Operative matrix effects can occur from elevated dissolved solids. Using this technique, matrix effects have been observed when the concentration of calcium and/or the combined concentrations of the matrix elements (Ca, Mg, and Na) and silica exceed 125 mg/L and 250 mg/L, respectively. To verify that a matrix effect is not operative, an LFM (see Sect. 5.10) must be analyzed when a primary contaminant (see Sect. 4.0) concentration exceeds 80% of the established maximum contaminant level (MCL) or action level. If the absence of a matrix interference cannot be verified, the sample must be analyzed by method of standard additions or another approved method.

## 4.6
When determining lead by this method, levels of silica that exceed 30 mg/L, when pre-concentrated 2X, cause a suppressive effect on lead determinations. For samples containing silica above 30 mg/L and lead concentrations greater than 10 &micro;g/L, lead must be determined by method of standard additions or by another approved compliance monitoring method.

## 4.7
When determining boron and silica, only plastic or PTFE labware should be used from time of sample collection to completion of analysis. In this method, glassware is specifically avoided and only the use of metal-free plastic labware is recommended. Borosilicate glass should be avoided to prevent contamination of these analytes.

## 4.8
The total recoverable sample digestion procedure given in Section 12.16 is suitable for the determination of silver in aqueous samples containing concentrations up to 0.1 mg/L.

## 4.9
Compliance monitoring data for metal contaminants are normally reported in units of mg/L; however, the data for the total recoverable analytes in this method are noted in units of &micro;g/L. This difference is done to reduce or eliminate the listing of non-significant zeros. When data are reported for compliance monitoring, the data should be reported in the same units used to express the established MCL and to the appropriate numerical level of significance.

# 5. Definitions

## 5.1 Batch
A set of set of up to 20 samples prepared at the same time with the same reagents.

## 5.2 Calibration Blank
A volume of reagent water acidified with the same acid matrix reagents as in the calibration standards. The calibration blank is a zero standard and is used to calibrate the AVICP instrument (Sects. 14).

## 5.3 Calibration Standard (CAL)
A solution prepared from the dilution of stock standard solutions. The CAL solutions contain the acid matrix reagents and are used to calibrate the instrument response with respect to analyte concentration (Sect. 14).

## 5.4 Dissolved Analyte
The concentration of analyte in an aqueous sample that will pass through a 0.45-um membrane filter assembly prior to sample acidification.

## 5.5 Field Reagent Blank (FRB)
An aliquot of reagent water that is placed in a sample container in the laboratory and treated as a sample in all respects, including shipment to the sampling site, exposure to the sampling site conditions, storage, acid preservation, and all analytical procedures. The FRB is used to determine if method analytes or interferences are present in the field environment.

## 5.6 Instrument Detection Limit (IDL)
The concentration equivalent to the analyte signal which is equal to three times the standard deviation of a series of seven replicate measurements of the calibration blank signal at the same wavelength.

## 5.7 Instrument Performance Check (IPC)
A solution of method analytes in the acid matrix reagents used to evaluate the performance of the instrument system with respect to a defined set of method criteria (Sec. 11.3.3).

## 5.8 Laboratory Duplicates (LD1 and LD2)
Two aliquots of the same sample taken in the laboratory and analyzed separately with identical procedures. Analyses of LD1 and LD2 indicates precision associated with laboratory procedures, but not with sample collection, preservation, or storage procedures.

## 5.9 Laboratory Fortified Blank (LFB)
An aliquot of LRB to which known quantities of the method analytes are added in the laboratory. The LFB is analyzed exactly like a sample, and its purpose is to determine whether the methodology is in control and whether the laboratory is capable of making accurate and precise measurements (Sec. 11.3.2).

## 5.10 Laboratory Fortified Sample Matrix (LFM)
An aliquot of a drinking water or drinking water supply sample to which known quantities of the method analytes are added in the laboratory. The LFM is analyzed exactly like a sample, and its purpose is to determine whether the sample matrix contributes bias to the analytical results. The background concentrations of the analytes in the sample matrix must be determined in a separate aliquot and the measured values in the LFM corrected for background concentrations (Sec. 11.4).

## 5.11 Laboratory Reagent Blank (LRB)
An aliquot of reagent water that is treated exactly as a sample including exposure to all labware, equipment, and reagents, that are used with other samples. The LRB is used to determine if method analytes or other interferences are present in the laboratory environment, reagents, or apparatus.

## 5.12 Linear Dynamic Range (LDR)
The concentration range over which the instrument response to an analyte is linear.

## 5.13 Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL)
The maximum permissible level of a contaminant in water which is delivered to any user of a public water system (Pb 0.015 mg/L and Cu 1.3 mg/L).

## 5.14 Method Detection Limit (MDL)
The minimum concentration of an analyte that can be identified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that the analyte concentration is greater than zero (Sec. 19 and Table 1).

## 5.15 Plasma Solution
A solution used to determine the nebulizer argon flow rate or gas pressure that will produce the optimum net-signal-to-noise (S-B/B) needed for the most requiring analyte included in the analytical scheme (Sects. 7.11 &10.2).

## 5.16 Quality Control Sample (QCS)
A solution of method analytes of known concentrations which is used to fortify an aliquot of LRB or sample matrix. The QCS is obtained from a source external to the laboratory and different from the source of calibration standards. It is used to check either laboratory or instrument performance (Sec. 11.2.4).

## 5.17 Special Interference Check (SIC) Solution
A solution of selected method analytes of higher concentrations which is used to evaluate the procedural routine for correcting known inter element spectral interferences with respect to a defined set of method criteria.

## 5.18 Standard Addition
The addition of a known amount of analyte to the sample in order to determine the relative response of the detector to an analyte within the sample matrix. The relative response is then used to assess either an operative matrix effect or the sample analyte concentration.

## 5.19 Stock Standard Solution
A concentrated solution containing one or more method analytes prepared in the laboratory using assayed reference materials or purchased from a reputable commercial source (Sec. 14).

## 5.20 Total Recoverable Analyte
For this method, the concentration of analyte determined by the analysis of an unfiltered acid preserved drinking water sample following digestion by refluxing with hot dilute mineral acid(s) as specified in the method. Data are reported as a “total” element determination - the combined concentrations of the dissolved and suspended fractions of the sample.

# 6. Equipment and Supplies

- Thermo Scientific iCAP 6300 Duo ICP Spectrometer equipped with a dual-channel peristaltic pump and autosampler
-	Neslab ThermoFlex 900 Recirculating Chiller
-	Polypropylene culture tubes (autosampler cups)
-	Personal Computer with iTEVA Software
-	Standard PVC 2-Stop 0.040”-ID Peristaltic Pump Tubing (white-white)
-	Standard PVC 2-Stop 0.025”-ID Peristaltic Pump Tubing (orange-white)
-	High purity compressed Argon
-	Compressed Nitrogen
-	Micro Essential  pHydrion Papers 2-10  dip and match to the color chart
-	Analytical balanace with the capability to measure to 0.1 mg.
-	Class ‘A’ pipetter.

# 7. Reagents & Standards

-	Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid
-	Concentrated Nitric Acid (for trace metals analysis)
-	Purchased standard solutions containing:  Cu, Pb, Ca, Mg, Na, and Si at 1000 mg/L (primary and secondary sources). These analytes may be purchased individually or in combination with one another or other elements.

## 7.1
Reagents may contain elemental impurities which might affect analytical data. Only high-purity reagents that conform to the American Chemical Society specifications must be used whenever possible. If the purity of a reagent is in question, analyze it for contamination. All acids used for this method should be of ultrahigh-purity grade or equivalent. Trace metal grade acid may also be used if it can be verified by analysis to be free of contamination.

## 7.2 Reagent water.
All references to reagent water in this SOP refer to ASTM Type II grade water.

## 7.3 Calibration Standard Solutions.

### 7.3.1
To determine concentrations of trace metals in drinking water and drinking water supplies using the recommended wavelengths, utilize a multi-point analytical calibration usable to 1000 ug/L. Prepare in a mixture of 2% HNO3 (v/v) and 1% HCl (v/v) a calibration blank and three calibration standards at concentrations of  10,  100, 1000 ug/L, respectively. To create the multi-point calibration, curve-fit the response of the blank and standards and store as a computer file. This calibration is standardized before each period of analysis using the calibration blank and the mixed calibration standard solution containing 100 ug/L. A new multi-point calibration should be prepared weekly.

### 7.3.2
Ca, Mg, Na, and Si are calibrated using the same multi point calibration utilizing a calibration blank and an additional high std. at 50 mg/L concentration.

## 7.4 Blanks
Four types of blanks are required for this method. The calibration blank (CB) is used in establishing the analytical curve, the laboratory reagent blank (LRB) is used to assess possible contamination from the laboratory procedure, the laboratory fortified blank (LFB) is used to assess routine laboratory performance and a rinse blank (RB) is used to flush the uptake system to reduce memory interferences.

### 7.4.1
The CB is prepared by diluting 20 mL (1+1) HNO3 and 10 mL (1+1) HCl in a 500-mL PMP volumetric flask to volume with reagent water. Store the prepared blank solution to an acid-cleaned, never-used 500-mL FEP bottle. This bottle should be dedicated for reuse and storage of this solution.

### 7.4.2
The LRB is prepared by carrying 50 mL of reagent water through the entire analytical procedure. The LRB must contain all the reagents in the same volumes as used in processing the samples.

### 7.4.3
The LFB is prepared in the same manner as the LRB, and fortified by adding 2.5 mL of the 1 ug/ml fortifying solution to 50 mL of LRB. The LFB must be carried through the entire analytical procedure. The analyte concentrations fortified in the LFB are: 100 &micro;g/L.

### 7.4.4
The RB is prepared by acidifying reagent water in an acid-cleaned LDPE bottle to concentrations of 2% (v/v) HNO3 + 2% (v/v) HCl.

## 7.5 Instrument Performance Check (IPC) Solution
The IPC solution is used to verify instrument performance during analysis. It should be prepared by combining method analytes utilizing the same acid mixture (2% HNO3 + 1% HCl) as the calibration standards at a concentration of 100 ug/L. The IPC should be prepared in a PMP (metal-free plastic) volumetric flask to avoid B and SiO2 contamination. Store the IPC solution in a new, acid-cleaned FEP bottle dedicated for reuse and repeated storage of this solution.

# 8. Interferences

## 8.1.	Spectral Interferences
Spectral interferences are caused by background emission from continuous or recombination phenomena, stray light from the line emission of high concentration elements, overlap of a spectral line from another element, or unresolved overlap of molecular band spectra. Except for interference from background emission and possible stray light, which can usually be compensated for by subtracting the background emission adjacent to the analyte wavelength peak, spectral interferences associated with the analysis of drinking water are minimal. However, the absence of inter-element spectral interference should be verified. Criteria for determining an inter-element spectral interference is an apparent positive or negative concentration on the analyte that is outside the 3-sigma control limits of the calibration blank for the analyte.
NOTE: When an instrument equipped with a conventional diffraction grating that provides 0.016 nm first order resolution is used with the wavelengths in the noted spectral order and background correction locations given in Table 1, no detectable inter-element spectral interferences occurs between the trace element analytes listed in this method at concentrations < 20 mg/L. Since concentrations of trace elements in drinking water and drinking water supplies are far below the level of 20 mg/L, an inter-element correction routine for trace analytes would be unnecessary for an instrument so configured.
NAL utilizes the Thermo Duo ICAP 6300 with specified resolution of 7 pico-meters (0.007 nm) and therefore has twice the resolution require by methodology mitigating the requirement for inter-element correction routine for trace analytes.
On the other hand, the concentration of the water matrix elements can be in excess of 100 mg/L. Fortunately, the matrix elements are not spectrally rich and have few prominent lines to cause inter-element spectral interference. Using this method and analyzing single element solutions of 300 mg/L Ca, 200 mg/L Mg, 200 mg/L Na, and 100 mg/L Si, no spectral enhancement of other method analytes were observed, thus not requiring inter-element corrections. However, there are three concerns worth noting:
Note: If wavelengths, noted spectral order, and background correction locations different from those listed in Table 1 are used with this method, and/or the optical resolution of the instrument utilized does not provide 0.016 nm first order resolution or better, the absence of inter-element spectral interference must be confirmed by completing spectral scans over the wavelength area and background correction locations to be utilized. The spectral scans should be completed using single element solutions of both trace and water matrix elements of concentrations noted above that will verify nonexistent apparent analyte concentrations. If an inter-element spectral interference is detected, a correction routine that is operative during analysis must be used with daily verification using SIC solutions, to demonstrate that the routine meets the above criteria.

## 8.2.	Physical Interferences
Physical interferences are effects associated with the sample nebulization and transport processes. Changes in viscosity and surface tension can cause significant inaccuracies, especially in samples containing high dissolved solids or high acid concentrations. Physical interferences of the types described above have not been evident in the analysis of most drinking waters. However, the use of a peristaltic pump to regulate solution uptake rate and the use of mass flow controllers that provide better control of the argon flow rates, especially for the nebulizer, improve instrument stability and precision.

## 8.3.	Chemical Interferences
Chemical interferences include molecular-compound formation, ionization effects, and solute-vaporization effects. In general, chemical interferences are highly dependent on matrix type and the specific element. To counteract ionization and matrix interferences in AVICP-OES, some laboratories routinely use an ionization buffer along with an internal standard added to both standards and samples alike in the sample train using a peristaltic pump and mixing tee. Use of an ionization buffer is permitted with this method provided the addition does not cause an inter-element spectral interference with a method analyte. However, in drinking water analyses the use of an internal standard with pneumatic nebulization is discouraged because it is not necessary and adds additional variance to the determination. The above stated chemical interferences have not been observed using this method for drinking water analyses when the operating conditions and preparations procedures are followed as written.

## 8.4.	Memory Interferences
Memory interferences result when analytes in a previous sample contribute to the signals measured in a new sample. Memory effects can result from sample deposition on the uptake tubing to the nebulizer and from the buildup of sample material in the plasma torch and spray chamber. The site where these effects occur is dependent on the element and can be minimized by flushing the system with a rinse blank between samples. The rinse times necessary for a particular element should be estimated prior to analysis. For the water matrix elements this may be achieved by aspirating a single element standard solution corresponding to their LDRs, while for the trace contaminants single element solutions containing 10 mg/L are sufficient. The aspiration time should be the same as a normal sample analysis period, followed by analysis of the rinse blank at designated intervals. The length of time required to reduce analyte signal to within a factor of 10 times the calibration blank should be noted. Until the required rinse time is established, this method requires a rinse period using the rinse blank of at least 30 sec between samples and standards. If a memory interference is suspected, the sample should be re-analyzed after a long rinse period.

# 9. Sample Collection, Preservation, and Storage

## 9.1.
For the determination of trace and water matrix elements in drinking water and	drinking water supplies, samples are not filtered, but acidified with (1+1) nitric acid to a pH < 2 (3mL of [1+1] acid per liter of sample or 1mL per 250 mL of sample should be sufficient). Preservation may be done at the time of collection; however, to avoid the hazards of strong acids in the field, transport restrictions and possible contamination, it is recommended that the samples be returned to the laboratory within two weeks of collection and acid preserved upon receipt in the laboratory. Following acidification, the sample should be mixed, held for sixteen hours, and then verified to be pH < 2 just prior to withdrawing an aliquot for sample processing. If for some reason, such as high alkalinity, the sample pH is verified to be > 2, more acid must be added and the sample held for sixteen hours until verified to be pH < 2. If properly preserved, the sample can be held up to 6 months.

# 10.	Labware

## 10.1.
For determination of trace levels of elements, contamination and loss are of prime consideration. Potential contamination sources include improperly cleaned laboratory apparatus and general contamination within the laboratory environment from dust, etc. A clean laboratory work area designated for trace element sample handling should be used. Sample containers can introduce positive and negative errors in the determination of trace elements by (1) contributing contaminants through surface desorption or leaching, and (2) depleting element concentrations through adsorption processes. All reusable labware (polyethylene, polymethylpentene, PTFE, FEP, etc.) and plastic disposable digestion tubes, caps, and watch glasses should be sufficiently clean for the task objectives. Several cleaning procedures can provide clean labware. The procedure recommended for reusable labware includes washing with a detergent solution, rinsing with tap water, and soaking for 4 h or more in a mixture of 5% (v/v) HNO3 and 5% (v/v) HCl, rinsing with reagent water and storing clean. (If digested LRBs indicate random contamination, the plastic disposable digestion tubes, caps, and watch glasses should be cleaned with 2% (v/v) HNO3 and rinsed with reagent water prior to use.) Chromic acid cleaning solutions must be avoided because chromium is an analyte.

## 10.2.	Plastic volumetric labware
PMP (polymethylpentene) or equivalent metal free plastic volumetric flasks (50-mL to 500-mL capacities), graduated cylinders (50-mL), and disposable metal-free plastic digestion tubes with caps and watch glass covers.

# 11.	Quality Control

## 11.1.
All analyses performed under this SOP must be conducted in accordance with New Age/Landmark Laboratory’s [Quality System Manual](../../../NALQMS.md). The minimum requirements of this program consists of an IDOC, and the periodic analysis of LRB, LFB and other laboratory solutions as a continuing check on performance.

## 11.2.	Initial Demonstration of Performance.

### 11.2.1.
The initial demonstration of performance is used to characterize instrument performance (determination of linear dynamic ranges and analysis of quality control samples) and laboratory performance (determination of method detection limits) prior to analyses conducted by this method.

### 11.2.2.	Linear dynamic range (LDR)
The upper limit of the LDR must be established for each wavelength used for the analysis of the drinking water matrix analytes: Ca, Mg and silica. It must be determined from a linear calibration prepared using the established instrument operating conditions.

### 11.2.2.1.
Analyze succeedingly higher standard concentrations of the analyte until the observed analytes concentration exceeds 10% below the known concentration of the standard.

### 11.2.2.2.
Document the LDRs and kept on file.

### 11.2.2.3.
Sample analyte concentrations that are greater than 90% of the determined upper LDR limit must be diluted and reanalyzed.

### 11.2.2.4.
The LDRs must be verified as required for certification or whenever, in the judgment of the analyst, a change in analytical performance caused by either a change in instrument hardware or operating conditions would dictate they be re-determined.

### 11.2.3. Non-linear dynamic range
The upper limit of the non-linear calibration used for the determination of Na is the highest standard used to describe the calibration curve. The non-linear calibration must be established using the same instrument operating conditions used for analysis.

11.2.3.1.	Sample concentrations that are > 10% above the upper limit for Na must be diluted and reanalyzed.

11.2.3.2.	The upper limit must be verified as required for certification or whenever, in the judgment of the analyst, a change in analytical performance caused by either a change in instrument hardware or operating conditions would dictate they be re-determined.

### 11.2.4.	Quality control sample (QCS)
When beginning the use of this method, on a quarterly basis, after the receipt of new calibration standard solutions, verify the calibration standards and acceptable instrument performance with the preparation and analysis of a QCS.

#### 11.2.4.1.
The determined mean concentrations from 3 analyses of the QCS must be within ± 5% of the stated values to verify the calibration standards. If the calibration standard cannot be verified, performance of the determinative step of the method is unacceptable. The source of the problem must be identified and corrected before either proceeding on with the initial determination of method detection limits or continuing with on-going analyses.

### 11.2.5.	Method detection limit (MDL)
MDLs must be established for all wavelengths utilized for trace element determinations in total recoverable digestates. MDLs are determined using reagent water (blank) fortified to a concentration ranging from the instrument detection limit (IDL) to approximately two times the IDL. To determine MDL values, take seven replicate aliquots of the fortified reagent water and process through the entire total recoverable analytical procedure. Perform all calculations defined in the method and report the concentration values in the appropriate units. Calculate the MDL as follows:

MDL = (t) x (S)

where: 	t = students' t value for a 99% confidence level and a standard                         deviation estimate with n-1 degrees of freedom (t = 3.14 for                        seven replicates).
S = standard deviation of the replicate analyses.

Note: If the relative standard deviation (RSD) from the analyses of the seven aliquots must be < 10% and neither random nor reagent contamination is operative, the concentration used to determine the analyte MDL may have been inappropriately high for the determination. If so, this could result in the calculation of an unrealistically low MDL. In this case the MDL determination should be repeated using a lower concentration.

Determined MDLs for the analytes: As, Be, Cd, Sb, Se and Pb must be < 1/5 their respective MCL or action level. MDLs should be determined annually, when a new operator begins work or whenever, in the judgment of the analyst, a change in analytical performance caused by either a change in instrument hardware or operating conditions would dictate they be re-determined.

## 11.3.	Assessing Laboratory Performance (mandatory)

### 11.3.1.	Laboratory reagent blank (LRB)
The laboratory must analyze at least one LRB (Sect. 5.11) with each batch of 20 or fewer samples. LRB data are used to assess contamination from the laboratory environment. LRB values that exceed the MDL indicate laboratory or reagent contamination should be suspected. When LRB values for the trace analytes are above the calculated reporting limit (2.2 times the analyte MDL), fresh aliquots of the samples must be prepared and analyzed again for the affected analytes after the source of contamination has been corrected and acceptable LRB values have been obtained.

### 11.3.2.	Laboratory fortified blank (LFB)
The laboratory must analyze at least one LFB (Sect. 5.9) with each batch of samples. Calculate accuracy as percent recovery using the following equation:

R = (LFB/S) X 100

where: 	R = percent recovery.
LFB = laboratory fortified blank determined concentration.
S = concentration equivalent of analyte added to fortify the LRB solution.

If the recovery of any analyte falls outside the required control limits of 90-110%, that analyte is judged to be out of control, and the source of the problem should be identified and resolved before continuing analyses. The laboratory must use LFB analyses data to assess laboratory performance against the appropriate required control limits of 90-110%.

When sufficient internal performance data become available (usually a minimum of twenty to thirty analyses), optional control limits can be developed from the mean percent recovery (x) and the standard deviation (S) of the mean percent recovery. These data can be used to establish the upper and lower control limits as follows:
UPPER CONTROL LIMIT = x + 3S
LOWER CONTROL LIMIT = x - 3S

The optional control limits must be equal to or better than the appropriate required control limits. After each five to ten new recovery measurements, new control limits can be calculated using only the most recent twenty to thirty data points. Also, the standard deviation (S) data should be used to establish an on-going precision statement for the level of concentrations included in the LFB. These data must be kept on file and be available for review.

### 11.3.3.	Instrument performance check (IPC) solution
The laboratory must initially and periodically verify that the instrument calibration is within required control limits. For all determinations the laboratory must analyze the IPC solution (100 ppb) and a portion of the calibration blank immediately following calibration, after every tenth sample and at the end of the sample run. Analysis of the calibration blank should always be less than the calculated reporting limit (2.2 times the analyte MDL) for the trace elements. Analysis of the IPC solution must verify that the instrument is within ± 5% of calibration.

### 11.3.4.	Spectral interference check (SIC) solution
For this method using the listed wavelengths, the specified background locations, and an instrument with first order resolution of 0.016 nm or better, verification of inter element spectral interference is not required.

## 11.4.	Assessing Total Recoverable Analyte Recovery and Data Quality

### 11.4.1.
Sample non-homogeneity and the chemical nature of the sample matrix can affect analyte recovery and the quality of the data. In the analysis of finished drinking water, these aspects are rarely an issue. However, source water for a drinking water supply can have varying turbidity. Taking separate aliquots from the sample for replicate and fortified analyses can, in some cases, assess the effect. Unless otherwise specified by the data user, laboratory or program, the following laboratory fortified matrix (LFM) procedure is required.

### 11.4.2.
The laboratory must add a known amount of each analyte to a minimum of 10% of the routine samples. The LFM aliquot must be a duplicate of the aliquot used for sample analysis and fortified prior to sample preparation. The added analyte concentration must be the same as that used in the laboratory fortified blank (100 ppb).  

### 11.4.3.
Calculate the percent recovery for each analyte, corrected for analyte background concentrations greater than the calculated reporting limit measured in the unfortified sample, and compare these values to the designated LFM recovery range of 85-115%.

### 11.4.4.
If the recovery of any analyte falls outside the designated LFM recovery range, and the laboratory performance for that analyte is shown to be in control (Sect. 11.3), the recovery problem encountered with the fortified sample is judged to be matrix related, not system related. If the analyte in question is a primary contaminant (Sect. 4.0), under certain circumstances additional analyses may be required. For a primary contaminant not requiring additional analysis, for a secondary contaminant, or non-regulated analyte, the data user should be informed that the result for that analyte is suspect due to matrix effects.

### 11.4.5.
Certified blind reference materials are analyzed twice annually to provide additional performance data. The analysis of reference samples is a valuable tool for demonstrating the ability to perform the method acceptably.

# 12.	Procedure

## 12.1.
Open argon tank and stem valve. Regulator delivery pressure should be set at 90 psi.

## 12.2.
Open nitrogen tank and stem valve. Regulator delivery pressure should be set at 80 psi.

## 12.3.
Turn on exhaust fan.

## 12.4.
Turn on the chiller. Set at 18°C. (Operation @ higher elevations requires that the temperature set point be lowered to 14°C.)

## 12.5.
Empty the waste carboy if necessary.

## 12.6.
Check rinse reservoir for auto-sampler. If necessary fill the rinse reservoir with Rinse Blank solution (2% HNO3/2% HCL).

## 12.7.
Inspect peristaltic pump tubing for distortions or flattening and replace if necessary.

## 12.8.
Double-click the iTEVA icon.

## 12.9.
Enter the user name and wait for the instrument to initialize.

## 12.10.
In the lower right hand corner of the iTEVA screen is a small symbol of a flame or plasma. Click on this to open torch ignition screen. Click on “Plasma On”.

## 12.11.
Instrument will initialize ignition procedure and pump will engage.

## 12.12.
Connect the pump tubing, engage pump lock downs, place sipper tip into rinse blank beaker and making sure the sample uptake has a uniform and smooth flow and the drain tubing has air bubbles.

## 12.13.
Click on the Analyst icon.

## 12.14.
From the lower left-side workspace select the Analyst tab.

### 12.14.1.
In the top menu bar Select Method|Open Method

### 12.14.2.
Select EPA200.5

### 12.14.3.
Allow 6300 to warm up for 90 to 120 minutes prior to proceeding with calibration and sample analysis.

## 12.15.
Click on the Sequence tab on the bottom left to create a sequence run table.

### 12.15.1.
Click on Autosession|New Manual|New

### 12.15.2.
Identify the number of samples to be run and name them using the appropriate sample ID and nomenclature. Click Okay.

### 12.15.2.1.
Samples can be renamed, added to, subtracted from by selecting the Grid icon.

### 12.15.3.
Click Autosession|Save As

### 12.15.4.
Name the Autosession starting with the instrument ID, the date of analysis, “A” (batch letter) and initials.

### 12.15.5.
In the description box indicate the analytes of interest, the type of sample (water, soil) and the sample ID.

### 12.15.6.
Select Save.

## 12.16.	Sample Preparation (Total Recoverable Digestion)

### 12.16.1.
For the determination of trace analytes and water matrix elements in drinking water and source water supply.

#### 12.16.1.1.
Using a 50-mL PMP graduated cylinder, transfer a 50 mL (± 0.5 mL) aliquot from a well-mixed, acid preserved sample to a 50-mL clean digestion tube.

#### 12.16.1.2.	 
dd 1.0 mL (1+1) HNO3 and 0.5 mL (1+1) HCl.

#### 12.16.1.3.
Place the digestion tube in the block digester. Power the digestion block to preselected settings to evaporate the sample at a temperature of 95 °C (± 2 °C).

##### 12.16.1.3.1.
Pre-concentrate the sample until the volume has been reduced to approximately 25 mL.

##### 12.16.1.3.2.
Cover the digestion tube with a plastic watch glass and reflux the sample for 30 minutes.

#### 12.16.1.4.
Once the refluxing step is complete, remove the digestion tube from the block digester and allow the sample to cool.

#### 12.16.1.5.
When cool, using the volume gradation marks on the digestion tube, adjust the sample volume to 25 mL with reagent water.

#### 12.16.1.6.
Cap the digestion tube and mix.

#### 12.16.1.7.
The sample is now ready for analysis.

### 12.16.2.
Because the effects of various matrices on the stability of analytes in low concentration cannot be characterized, all analyses should be performed as soon as possible after the completed preparation.

## 12.17.
To run the auto session press the run icon in the sequence table.

### 12.17.1.
When performing analysis flush the system with the calibration blank between each standard.

# 13. Data Analysis and Calculations

## 13.1.
Sample data for the water matrix elements (Ca, Mg and Na) and silica are to be reported in units of mg/L. For compliance monitoring, total recoverable trace elements are reported in the same units used to express the MCL or action level. If there is no established MCL, the trace element is reported in µg/L.

## 13.2.
For water matrix analytes, multiply the solution analyte concentrations by the dilution factor, 0.5, and report the data with allowance for sample dilution when analyte concentrations exceed 90% or more of the LDR upper limit, and in the case of Na when the analytical range is exceeded. Round the data to the thousandth place and report up to three significant figures. Do not report analyte concentrations below the IDL.

## 13.3.
For total recoverable trace element analytes, multiply solution analyte concentrations by the dilution factor 0.5, round off the data values (µg/L) to the nearest tenths place and report analyte concentrations up to three significant figures. For drinking water compliance monitoring, do not report analyte concentrations below the IDL.

## 13.4.
The QC data obtained during the analyses provide an indication of the quality of the sample data and should be provided with the sample results.


# 14. Calibration and Standarization

1.	After powering up the instrument allow it to stabilize anywhere from 90-120 minutes.
2.	An initial calibration must be performed daily with a minimum of a calibration blank and three calibration points.
3.	Prepare the non-zero calibration standards at the following levels: 10, 100, and 1000 ppb. The calibration blank is prepared by acidifying reagent water to the same concentration as the standards and samples. For calibration standards a serial dilution is recommended to reduce the standard deviation between working standards.
4.	 The initial calibration must be linear and have a correlation coefficient of 0.998 or better. If the correlation of 0.998 cannot be achieved than the extreme upper and lower calibration points may be removed from the curve so long as three non-zero points remain. During the course of an analytical run, the instrument may be “resloped” or recalibrated to correct for instrument drift. The correlation coefficient for the recalibration must also be 0.998 or higher. A recalibration must then be followed immediately by a new analysis of a IPC and RB before any further samples may be analyzed.

# 15. Data Assessment and Acceptance Criteria
See Quality Control Checklist in 20. TABLES, DIAGRAMS, FLOWCHARTS, VALIDATION  DATA

# 16.	Safety

## 16.1.
The toxicity or carcinogenicity of each reagent used in this method have not been fully established. Each chemical should be regarded as a potential health hazard and exposure to these compounds should be as low as reasonably achievable. A reference file of material data handling sheets is available to all personnel involved in the chemical analysis. Specifically, concentrated nitric and hydrochloric acids are moderately toxic and extremely irritating to skin and mucus membranes. Use these reagents in a fume hood whenever possible and if eye or skin contact occurs, flush with large volumes of water. Always wear safety glasses or a shield for eye protection, protective clothing and observe proper mixing when working with these reagents.

## 16.2.
Acidification of samples should be done in a fume hood.

## 16.3.
The inductively coupled plasma should only be viewed with proper eye protection from the ultraviolet emissions.

## 16.4.
It is the responsibility of the user of this method to comply with relevant disposal and waste handling.

## 16.5.
Each chemical must be regarded as a potential health hazard and exposure to these chemicals should be a low as reasonably possible. Concentrated nitric and hydrochloric acids are toxic and irritating to the skin and mucus membranes.

## 16.6.
Due to the use of strong acids in this method, protective gloves and lab coats are mandatory in the laboratory.

## 16.7.
Use acid reagents in a fume hood and if eye or skin contact occurs, flush with large volumes of water.

## 16.8.
Wash hands thoroughly after handling samples and standards.  

## 16.9.
On all projects, chemists need to be aware of, and adhere to the New Age/Landmark Health and Safety Plan, and any site-specific health and safety requirements.

# 17.	 Pollution Prevention and Waste Management
All samples received and analyzed on-site will be returned to the client’s representative for proper disposal.  New Age staff is not authorized to take permanent possession or dispose of any samples.  Unless authorized by the client and the President, samples are not to be removed from the project site. Unless specific stipulations are made to dispose of lab waste on the project site, digestate solutions are brought back to the fixed lab and disposed of in the appropriate acid waste barrel.

# 18.	References

US EPA (2003). Method 200.5. Determination of Trace Elements by Axially Viewed Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry Revision 4.2, Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio 45268.
